en,zh: optimize catalog structure of Restore Data into TiDB in Kubern… (#912)
pingcap/docs-tidb-operator: en/restore-data-using-tidb-lightning.md

---

> title: Import Data

Reviewer: This doc only describes how to deploy TiDB Lightning, but not any mention of how to use it or how to import data.

Author: After TiDB Lightning is deployed, a data import jos will start. so we deploy TiDB Lightning to import data.

Reviewer: Got it. Thanks. 
Will you just tell users that as well? They may have the same confusion as I did.

---

> title: Import Data into TiDB in Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Import Data
```

Author: fixed

TiDB Lightning Helm chart supports both local and remote data sources.

#### Local

In the local mode, the backup data must be on one of the Kubernetes node. To enable this mode, set `dataSource.local.nodeName` to the node name and `dataSource.local.hostPath` to the path of the backup data. The path should contain a file named `metadata`.

#### Remote

Unlike the local mode, the remote mode needs to use [rclone](https://rclone.org) to download the backup tarball file from a network storage to a PV. Any cloud storage supported by rclone should work, but currently only the following have been tested: [Google Cloud Storage (GCS)](https://cloud.google.com/storage/), [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [Ceph Object Storage](https://ceph.com/ceph-storage/object-storage/).

To restore backup data from the remote source, take the following steps:

> 1. Make sure that `dataSource.local.nodeName` and `dataSource.local.hostPath` in `values.yaml` arecommented out.

Author: fixed

2. Grant permissions to the public cloud account

    Create a `Secret` containing the rclone configuration. A sample configuration is listed below. Only one cloud storage configuration is required. For other cloud storages, refer to [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/). Using Amazon S3 as the storage is the same as restoring data using BR and Dumpling.

>     There are three methods to grant permissions. The configuration varies with different methods. For details, see [Backup the TiDB Cluster on AWS using BR](backup-to-aws-s3-using-br.md#three-methods-to-grant-aws-account-permissions).

Author: fixed

TiDB Lightning Helm chart supports both local and remote data sources.

#### Local

In the local mode, the backup data must be on one of the Kubernetes node. To enable this mode, set `dataSource.local.nodeName` to the node name and `dataSource.local.hostPath` to the path of the backup data. The path should contain a file named `metadata`.

#### Remote

> Unlike the local mode, the remote mode needs to use [rclone](https://rclone.org) to download thebackup tarball file from a network storage to a PV. Any cloud storage supported by rclone shouldwork, but currently only the following have been tested: [Google Cloud Storage (GCS)](https://cloud.google.com/storage/), [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [Ceph Object Storage](https://ceph.com/ceph-storage/object-storage/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike the local mode, the remote mode needs to use [rclone](https://rclone.org) to download the backup tarball file from network storage to a PV. Any cloud storage supported by rclone should work, but currently only the following have been tested: [Google Cloud Storage (GCS)](https://cloud.google.com/storage/), [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [Ceph Object Storage](https://ceph.com/ceph-storage/object-storage/).
```

Author: fixed

To restore backup data from the remote source, take the following steps:

1. Make sure that `dataSource.local.nodeName` and `dataSource.local.hostPath` in `values.yaml` arecommented out.

2. Grant permissions to the public cloud account

    Create a `Secret` containing the rclone configuration. A sample configuration is listed below. Only one cloud storage configuration is required. For other cloud storages, refer to [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/). Using Amazon S3 as the storage is the same as restoring data using BR and Dumpling.

    * Grant permissions by importing AccessKey and SecretKey

>         1. Download [backup-rbac.yaml](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/manifests/backup/backup-rbac.yaml), and execute the following command to create the role-based accesscontrol (RBAC) resources in the `${namespace}`. This step could be skipped when using TiDB Lightning to restore.

Reviewer 2: No need to change the content.

Author: removed

    1. Make sure that `dataSource.local.nodeName` and `dataSource.local.hostPath` in `values.yaml` are commented out.

>     2. Public Cloud Account Grant Permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Grant permissions to the public cloud account 
```

Reviewer: Is this what you mean?

Author: yes， fixed

        There are three methods to grant permissions. The configuration varies with different methods. For details, see [Backup the TiDB Cluster on AWS using BR](backup-to-aws-s3-using-br.md#three-methods-to-grant-aws-account-permissions).

        * Grant permissions by importing AccessKey and SecretKey

>             1. Download [backup-rbac.yaml](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/manifests/backup/backup-rbac.yaml), and execute the following command to create the role-based access control (RBAC) resources in the `${namespace}` namespace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            1. Download [backup-rbac.yaml](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/manifests/backup/backup-rbac.yaml), and execute the following command to create the role-based access control (RBAC) resources in the `${namespace}`:
```

Author: fixed

>             1. Download [backup-rbac.yaml](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/manifests/backup/backup-rbac.yaml), and execute the following command to create the role-based access control (RBAC) resources in the `${namespace}` namespace:

Reviewer: Do you need to change the yaml file version for v1.1 docs? If you do, please remember to edit the link after the PR is cherry-picked to v1.1 branch.

Author: Thanks for reminding, this link in v1.1 and dev is the same, and we don't need to change it.

                {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

                ```yaml
                kubectl apply -f backup-rbac.yaml -n ${namespace}
                ```

>             2. Create a `Secret` containing the rclone configuration. A sample configuration is listed below. Only one cloud storage configuration is required. For other cloud storages, refer to [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/). Using Amazon S3 as the storage is the same as restoring data using BR and Dumpling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            2. Create a `Secret` configuration file `secret.yaml` containing the rclone configuration. A sample configuration is listed below. Only one cloud storage configuration is required. For other cloud storages, refer to [rclone documentation](https://rclone.org/). Using Amazon S3 as the storage is the same as restoring data using BR and Dumpling.
```

Author: fixed

                type: Opaque
                stringData:
                  rclone.conf: |
                    [s3]
                    type = s3
                    provider = AWS
                    env_auth = false
                    access_key_id = ${access_key}
                    secret_access_key = ${secret_key}
                    region = us-east-1
                
                    [ceph]
                    type = s3
                    provider = Ceph
                    env_auth = false
                    access_key_id = ${access_key}
                    secret_access_key = ${secret_key}
                    endpoint = ${endpoint}
                    region = :default-placement
                
                    [gcs]
                    type = google cloud storage
                    # The service account must include Storage Object Viewer role
                    # The content can be retrieved by `cat ${service-account-file} | jq -c .`
                    service_account_credentials = ${service_account_json_file_content}
                ```

                Execute the following command to create secret:

                {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

>                 ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                ```shell
```

                kubectl apply -f secret.yaml -n ${namespace}
                ```

        * Grant permissions by associating IAM with Pod or with ServiceAccount

>             1. Download [backup-rbac.yaml](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/manifests/backup/backup-rbac.yaml), and execute the following command to create the role-based access control (RBAC) resources in the `test1` namespace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            1. Download [backup-rbac.yaml](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/blob/master/manifests/backup/backup-rbac.yaml), and execute the following command to create the role-based access control (RBAC) resources in the `${namespace}`:
```

                {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}
            

>                 ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                ```shell
```

                kubectl apply -f backup-rbac.yaml -n ${namespace}
                ```
            
            2. If you grant permissions by associating Amazon S3 IAM with Pod or with ServiceAccount, you can ignore `s3.access_key_id` and `s3.secret_access_key`. Fill in the placeholders with your configurations and save it as `secret.yaml`.
            
                {{< copyable "" >}}
            
                ```yaml
                apiVersion: v1
                kind: Secret
                metadata:
                  name: cloud-storage-secret
                type: Opaque
                stringData:
                  rclone.conf: |
                    [s3]
                    type = s3
                    provider = AWS
                    env_auth = true
                    access_key_id =
                    secret_access_key =
                    region = us-east-1
                ```

                Execute the following command to create secret:
            
                {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}
            

>                 ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                ```shell
```

TiDB Lightning Helm chart supports both local and remote data sources.

#### Local

In the local mode, the backup data must be on one of the Kubernetes node. To enable this mode, set `dataSource.local.nodeName` to the node name and `dataSource.local.hostPath` to the path of the backup data. The path should contain a file named `metadata`.

#### Remote

Unlike the local mode, the remote mode needs to use [rclone](https://rclone.org) to download the backup tarball file from a network storage to a PV. Any cloud storage supported by rclone should work, but currently only the following have been tested: [Google Cloud Storage (GCS)](https://cloud.google.com/storage/), [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [Ceph Object Storage](https://ceph.com/ceph-storage/object-storage/).

To restore backup data from the remote source, take the following steps:

1. Make sure that `dataSource.local.nodeName` and `dataSource.local.hostPath` in `values.yaml` are commented out.

2. Grant permissions to remote storage access

>     Using Amazon S3 as the storage is the same as restoring data using BR and Dumpling, there are three methods to grant permissions. The configuration varies with different methods. For details, see [Back up the TiDB Cluster on AWS using BR](backup-to-aws-s3-using-br.md#three-methods-to-grant-aws-account-permissions). Using Ceph or GCS as the storage, only support grant permissions by importing AccessKey and SecretKey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Like restoring data using BR and Dumpling, when using Amazon S3 as the storage, there are three methods to grant permissions. The configuration varies with different methods. For details, see [Back up the TiDB Cluster on AWS using BR](backup-to-aws-s3-using-br.md#three-methods-to-grant-aws-account-permissions). If you use Ceph or GCS as the storage, you can only grant permissions by importing AccessKey and SecretKey.
```

    * Grant permissions by importing AccessKey and SecretKey

>         Using Amazon S3, Ceph or GCS as the storage, support grant permissions by importing AccessKey and SecretKey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        If you use Amazon S3, Ceph, or GCS as the storage, grant permissions by importing AccessKey and SecretKey.
```

                secret_access_key = ${secret_key}
                endpoint = ${endpoint}
                region = :default-placement
            
                [gcs]
                type = google cloud storage
                # The service account must include Storage Object Viewer role
                # The content can be retrieved by `cat ${service-account-file} | jq -c .`
                service_account_credentials = ${service_account_json_file_content}
            ```

        2. Execute the following command to create `Secret`:

            {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

            ```shell
            kubectl apply -f secret.yaml -n ${namespace}
            ```

    * Grant permissions by associating IAM with Pod or with ServiceAccount

>         Using Amazon S3 as the storage, support grant permissions by associating IAM with Pod or with ServiceAccount, in which `s3.access_key_id` and `s3.secret_access_key` can be ignored. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       If you use Amazon S3 as the storage, you can grant permissions by associating IAM with Pod or with ServiceAccount, in which `s3.access_key_id` and `s3.secret_access_key` can be ignored. 
```

>         1. Save following configurations as `secret.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        1. Save the following configurations as `secret.yaml`.
```

                secret_access_key =
                region = us-east-1
            ```
            
        2. Execute the following command to create `Secret`:
        
            {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}
        
            ```shell
            kubectl apply -f secret.yaml -n ${namespace}
            ```

> 3. Configure the `dataSource.remote.storageClassName` to an existing storage class in the Kubernetescluster.

Author: fixed

                secret_access_key =
                region = us-east-1
            ```
            
        2. Execute the following command to create `Secret`:
        
            {{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}
        
            ```shell
            kubectl apply -f secret.yaml -n ${namespace}
            ```

3. Configure the `dataSource.remote.storageClassName` to an existing storage class in the Kubernetes cluster.

> #### Ad hoc 

Author: Original english docs do not contain `Ad hoc` subsection, i translate this part. But the content of subsection `销毁 TiKV Importer 和 TiDB Lightning` have been updated by PR #955 , and haven't been translated. @ran-huang

Reviewer 2: `Ad hoc` is also a newly added section and is not translated yet.

Reviewer: `ad hoc` is translated in https://github.com/pingcap/docs-tidb-operator/pull/985 (unmerged though) 😅

Thank you for translating this! 😸
Anyway...next time you want to translate something, just let me know in advance so we can avoid repeated work.

> When restore data from remote storage, if the restore process is interrupted due to the exception, but you do not want to download backup data from the network storage repeatedly, you can use ad hoc mode to directly recover the data that has been downloaded and decompressed into PV through remote mode. The steps are as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When restoring data from remote storage, sometimes the restore process is interrupted due to the exception. In such cases, if you do not want to download backup data from the network storage repeatedly, you can use the ad hoc mode to directly recover the data that has been downloaded and decompressed into PV in the remote mode. The steps are as follows:
```

> 1. Ensure `dataSource.local` and `dataSource.remote` in config file `values.yaml` are empty。

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ensure `dataSource.local` and `dataSource.remote` in the config file `values.yaml` are empty。
```

> 2. Configure `dataSource.adhoc.pvcName` in `values.yaml` to PVC name used in restoring data from remote storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Configure `dataSource.adhoc.pvcName` in `values.yaml` to the PVC name used in restoring data from remote storage.
```

> 3. Configure `dataSource.adhoc.backupName` in `values.yaml` to the name of original backup data, such as: `backup-2020-12-17T10:12:51Z` (Do not contain '. Tgz' suffix of compressed file name on network storage).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Configure `dataSource.adhoc.backupName` in `values.yaml` to the name of the original backup data, such as: `backup-2020-12-17T10:12:51Z` (Do not contain the '. tgz' suffix of the compressed file name on network storage).
```

5. Diagnose the lightning following the [troubleshooting guide](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/troubleshoot-tidb-lightning/).

> ### Destroy TiDB Lightning

Author: typo, fixed

> ### Destroy TiDB Lightning

Reviewer 2: 这里改了？
